fix(composition): resolve @composeDirective definitions per-directive instead of per-spec (#3391)
apollographql/federation: .changeset/fix-compose-directive-subset-imports.md

---
"@apollo/composition": patch
---

> Fix `@composeDirective` failing with a false `DIRECTIVE_COMPOSITION_ERROR` when subgraphs import different subsets of directives from the same custom spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
"@apollo/composition": minor
---

Update `@composeDirective` merge logic to allow subgraphs to import different directives from the same spec. Previously, all subgraphs had to import ALL (exactly the same) custom directives (even if they did not use them) as otherwise composition would fail with a false `DIRECTIVE_COMPOSITION_ERROR`.
```

> Update `@composeDirective` merge logic to allow subgraphs to import different directives from the same spec. Previously, all subgraphs had to import ALL (exactly the same) custom directives (even if they did not use them) as otherwise composition would fail with a false `DIRECTIVE_COMPOSITION_ERROR`.

Reviewer 2: Note that this issue isn't really with federation `import`s per se; spec directives have a default name in a schema without imports, and the issue persists there too. This is really about definitions being absent in some subgraphs with the latest spec version. (This wording needs to be changed in the code comments as well.)

**Affected scenario:** two or more subgraphs `@link` the same custom spec URL but import different directives from it:

```graphql
# subgraph A — imports @foo AND @bar, composes both
@link(url: "https://myorg.dev/myspec/v1.0", import: ["@foo", "@bar"])
@composeDirective(name: "@foo") @composeDirective(name: "@bar")

# subgraph B — imports only @foo from the same spec
@link(url: "https://myorg.dev/myspec/v1.0", import: ["@foo"])
@composeDirective(name: "@foo")
```

This would produce a false error:
```
DIRECTIVE_COMPOSITION_ERROR: Core feature "https://myorg.dev/myspec" in subgraph "B"
does not have a directive definition for "@foo"
```

> The bug was order-dependent (failed when the subgraph elected as "latest" for the spec was not a superset of all other subgraphs' imports) and always failed for fully disjoint import sets (e.g. subgraph A imports only `@foo`, subgraph B imports only `@bar`).

Reviewer 2: Currently the change is being phrased as a feature improvement, in the sense that we're relaxing a validation. There's simultaneously bugs in that validation (the order-dependence you've mentioned), but the bugfix for that validation is a separate matter (if there's a need, we can file a patch for that).

**Root cause:** `ComposeDirectiveManager.getLatestDirectiveDefinition()` resolved definitions through a two-hop chain — `directiveName → spec identity → "latest" subgraph for that spec → schema.directive(...)`. The "latest" subgraph was determined by spec version alone, without checking whether it had actually imported the directive being resolved.

> **Fix:** a `directiveDefinitionMap` (`directiveName → DirectiveDefinition`) is now built during `validate()`, sourcing each entry from the highest-minor-version subgraph that actually imported that specific directive. `getLatestDirectiveDefinition()` does a direct lookup on this map instead of the indirect chain.

Reviewer 2: Implementation details shouldn't be in a changelog message, changelogs are tailored for package users and they don't need to read about the internal details of code changes unless it's relevant. (If they're curious, they can follow the auto-generated PR link in the changelog.)
